# Introduction

Questions of sex differences have generated a great deal of scientific research and popular dispute.
Foremost among them have been psychological and especially cognitive differences (Archer, 2019; Halpern, 2012; Hyde, 2014).
Cognitive research has largely concentrated on measuring average sex differences and identifying their causes, sometimes accompanied by the intention of reducing or eliminating such differences.
When no average difference is found, it may be correct to assume that nothing remains to explain.<sup>1</sup>
There is probably no significant sex difference in average (i.e., mean) general intelligence (Jensen, 1998; Mackintosh, 1996, 2011; Nisbett et al., 2012).
However, measurements of some specific cognitive abilities produce mean sex differences. And the mean is only one feature of these distributions: differing variability could correspond to a wider distribution of scores in one sex and disparate representation in the tails.
In combination with differing means in specific abilities, variability differences could be highly consequential in the tails.
Researchers have debated this possibility since the 19th century, nearly always in the form of greater male variability (GMV).

The idea is generally traced to Charles Darwin (1868, pp. 74f.; 1874, p. 224; 1875, p. 457).
It was applied to humans by others, who discussed physical as well as mental attributes.
Most notably it was embraced by Ellis (1894), contested by Pearson (1897), and propounded by Cattell (1903, p. 375) and Thorndike (1903, pp. 113-116; 1910, pp. 33-43).
However, there was little rigorous data collection and analysis on the question prior to the last thirty years (see Shields, 1982, for a history).
Feingold’s (1992) study of large US samples reanimated inquiry into the question of greater male variability.
A number of researchers contemporary to Feingold (1992) proposed that sex differences in variance could be as important as mean differences (B. J. Becker & Hedges, 1988; Favreau & Everett, 1996; Humphreys, 1988; Lubinski & Humphreys, 1990; see Voracek et al., 2013).
This prospect remains a source of disagreement, and some researchers have argued that findings of greater male variability are inconsistent and highly susceptible to environmental influence (Feingold, 1994; Hyde et al., 2008; Hyde & Mertz, 2009; Kane & Mertz, 2012; Penner, 2008; Zuze & Reddy, 2016).
Since the appearance of this new literature, other modern scholars have disputed the greater male variability hypothesis in broader expositions on sex differences, often citing these data (Bosson et al., 2018, pp. 235-237; Brannon, 2017, p. 175; Else-Quest et al., 2010; Fine, 2010; Hamlin, 2007, 2014, p. 92; Hyde & McKinley, 1997; Lips, 2008, pp. 220-222; G. Martin, 2015; Petsko, 2005; Richardson, 2012, 2013, pp. 74f.; Rivers & Barnett, 2013, pp. 97f.; Rippon, 2019, pp. 262f.; Roseberry & Roos, 2014, pp. 71f.; Spelke, 2005; Valian, 1998, pp. 338f.; Valla & Ceci, 2011).

Despite the many articles written on the subject, there have been few attempts to make sense of all the best available evidence. Hollingworth’s (1914) review found no consistent sex differences in variability but, as she noted, the data at the time were inadequate. McNemar and Terman’s (1936) review suggested a highly contradictory literature. They did, however, reliably find greater male variability in standardized verbal intelligence tests. Jensen’s (1971) analysis of data from thousands of children was summarized in his Table 18, which showed larger male variance among both white and black participants. Maccoby and Jacklin’s (1974) well-known compilation of the sex differences literature concluded that males were more variable in mathematical and spatial ability but not consistently in verbal ability. Such considerations of many individual studies preceded the development of meta-analysis (Glass, 1976; Schmidt & Hunter, 1977), and there has since been no comprehensive survey of the literature. The magnitude, prevalence, moderators, and causes of differences in variability remain open questions. The aim of this paper is to integrate and contribute to the information useful for answering them. The following study will address six specific questions: (1) In measures of cognitive ability, do scores of males tend to exhibit greater dispersion than those of their female counterparts? Measures of mathematical ability, verbal ability, spatial ability, and general cognitive ability will be examined. (2) Is greater male variability ubiquitous across different populations? An answer to this question would constrain possible explanations for the phenomenon. (3) How large are sex differences in variability? (4) Are there moderators of sex differences in variability? (5) Are males or females overrepresented in the tails of measurements of each cognitive ability? (6) What could cause sex differences in variability?

The most widely used quantification of sex differences in variability is the male-female variance ratio (VR). VRs greater than 1 indicate larger variance in males; a VR of 1.15, for instance, corresponds to 15% greater male variance. The male-female variance ratio will be used throughout this paper. Sex differences in the right and left tails of cognitive measures have largely been examined using male-female tail proportion ratios (TPRs); a TPR of 1.40 below a given cut-point would indicate that the proportion of males below that point is 40% greater than that of females. VRs and TPRs supply overlapping but different information. VRs reflect differences in the whole distribution’s absolute variability, whereas TPRs are affected by differences in central tendency, in variability in the direction of the tail, and in deviations from normality in the distribution. Cohen’s d will be used to express a standardized mean sex difference in terms of the quadratic mean of the male and female standard deviations (Cohen, 1988). A positive or negative d value will represent a male or female advantage, respectively, at the mean. Other effect sizes will be explored later, but the most common measures must be used for pragmatic reasons.

TPRs calculated from large data sets are still not very numerous, and they have been calculated with various cut-points (e.g., top 25%, 10%, 5%, 1%). The sparseness and heterogeneity of TPRs preclude useful combination with meta-analysis. However, VRs have been reported more frequently and can also be computed if standard deviations are reported instead. A meta-analysis will be performed on VRs, which will partially address the first four questions, and the literature on TPRs will be reviewed to address the fifth. The narrative review of TPRs will also serve to illustrate the existing evidence on the question of sex differences in variability.

The terms “gender” and “sex” have been subject to long-standing discussion and criticism (Cretella et al., 2019; Holmes & Monks, 2019; Muehlenhard & Peterson, 2011; Stoller, 1968; Wood & Eagly, 2015). It is not important here to distinguish between them, so they will be used interchangeably and neither “gender difference” nor “sex difference” will refer to a particular cause of such difference. The terms “intelligence” and “cognitive ability” will likewise be used synonymously, as will “variability”, “dispersion”, “spread”, and “scale”.

This study will proceed in six sections: (I) a presentation of simulation studies; (II) a review of TPRs and some of the literature on sex differences in variability; (III) a meta-analysis of data discovered through a systematic literature search; (IV) an analysis of important data from international assessments; (V) an examination of empirical arguments against the greater male variability hypothesis; and (VI) an exploration of potential causes of sex differences in variability. A general discussion with comments on empirical results and theoretical implications will follow.

<sup>1</sup> Even some sex differences develop to compensate for other sex differences (Arnold, 2020; de Vries, 2004; de Vries & Forger, 2015).

## References

Archer, J. (2019). The reality and evolutionary significance of human psychological sex differences. _Biological Reviews_, _94_(4), 1381-1415.
